Ibuprofen-induced renal tubular acidosis (RTA) with severe hypokalemia is an under-recognized and potentially life threatening adverse effect. We describe a case of recurrent severe metabolic acidosis secondary to repeated ibuprofen use. Case Report: A 45-year-old patient presented to hospital on multiple separate occasions for unexplained generalized weakness and acidemia. Each presentation was significant for hyperchloremic, hypokalemic metabolic acidosis. During the latest admission, investigations revealed a pH of 6.89, a bicarbonate of 5 mmol/L, a potassium level of 2.5 mmol/L, and a urine pH of 7.0 with a positive urine gap after fluid resuscitation. The patient had no significant medical co-morbidities and reported only taking pantoprazole. Initial toxicologic testing was negative for acetaminophen, salicylates, toxic alcohols, and other drugs of abuse. Subsequent laboratory investigation with High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) detected ibuprofen in both serum and urine. Upon repeat questioning the patient endorsed a habit of taking ibuprofen at home. During each hospital admission, ibuprofen was never prescribed and all symptoms and metabolic abnormalities resolved with supportive treatment. Case Discussion: Ibuprofen is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) available over the counter (OTC) since 1983. It is commonly used as an anti-pyretic and analgesic. Metabolic acidosis secondary to ibuprofen is an under-reported condition. The pathophysiology is unknown, but the most commonly cited mechanism is an ibuprofen induced RTA. Alternative explanation is direct acidemia from ibuprofen and its metabolites, all of which are weak acids. In all reported cases, metabolic abnormalities resolve with drug cessation and supportive treatment. Conclusion: We describe a patient with recurrent episodes of weakness, acidemia and investigations consistent with distal RTA secondary to ibuprofen. Abnormalities resolved with drug cessation and supportive treatment. Once ibuprofen was identified as the culprit, the patient remained off this drug and has been out of hospital since. This case highlights a severe, yet reversible, complication of a common OTC medication.
